# 3_gene_signature_R
..
Using an existing 50-gene expression signature known to
separate two molecular subtypes of the pediatric cancer rhabdomyosarcoma, we show that an exhaustiveiterative search algorithm can distill this complex classiﬁer down to two or three features with equal discrimination. We validated the two-gene signatures using three separate and distinct datasets, including one that uses degraded RNA extracted from formalin-ﬁxed, parafﬁn-embedded material. 

All gene expression analyses were conducted in R/BioCon-ductor using the "affy" and "affyPLM" packages and the Robust Multiarray Average (RMA) normalization algorithm. Principal component analysis (PCA) was conducted using the prcomp function in R (http://bit.ly/O10aUw). Subsequent analyses were conducted using scripts written in R 2.15. An exhaustive search was conducted by iterating over all possible combinations of 1, 2, and 3 genes from a given subset. Supervised analysis was conducted using naive bayes classiﬁcation (NB) using R papckage "caret","klaR" to construct a hyperplane best separating the fusion-negative and fusion-positive genes and to test the resulting classiﬁer model. To determine the most differentially expressed genes, a t test was conducted, and the genes were sorted according to the mean of the distribution. The most positive t test values were associated with the fusion-negative samples. All possible pairs from the 1,000 probes at the top(most fusion negative) and bottom (most fusion positive) of the list were used to make pairs for testing (i.e., 1,000 top vs.1,000 bottom ¼ 1,000,000 combinations). Two publicly available rhabdomyosarcoma gene expression
datasets were obtained(Williamson data and Davicioni data). 

The ﬁrst consisted of gene expression data from 101 patients with rhabdomyosarcoma. The metagenes corresponding to fusion-positive (F1) and fusion-negative disease (F2) from Williamson and colleagues , each with 25 genes, were chosen for further study, as detailed above. A second set of publicly available data consisted of 139 published alveolar and embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma expression proﬁles .Gene expression data in these cases were normalized, and PCA was conducted using 50 genes in the Williamson F1/F2 meta-genes. In addition, the most discriminatory combinations, as determined for the Williamson data through exhaustive search, were tested on the Davicioni dataset using the navive bayes  methods deﬁned above. Finally, we obtained a set of exon array data on 49 rhabdomyosarcoma tumor specimens for which fusion status was known (J.R. Anderson and T.J. Triche,unpublished data). The data were normalized using Affymetrix Power Tools, unsupervised and supervised PCA was conducted, and our classiﬁers were tested on these data.

Computational analyses for the nCounter data were carried out using normalized gene expression with the six housekeeping genes removed. The samples, each with 46 features, were subjected to unsupervised analysis with PCA. Using Naive Bayes, the gene combinations found above for the Williamson data were also tested on the nCounter data. Finally, all possible combinations of 1, 2, and 3 of the 46 genes were tested using NB to search for the most robust classiﬁer. 

Results
Two separate teams previously used transcriptome data from archived, freshly frozen specimens to develop complex gene classiﬁers that can discriminate fusion-positive from
fusion-negative rhabdomyosarcoma. After recapitulating the PCA using the 50-gene Williamson F1/F2 classiﬁer, an exhaustive search algorithm using linear NB was used to iterate among all the possible two-, three-, and four-gene combinations of the 50 genes to deﬁne a simplerclassiﬁer. Twenty-eight two- and three-gene combinations
correctly classiﬁed at least 98% of the samples 
